# Query Stage SDK
Java SDK framework for developing custom Fusion Query Stage plugins.

# Basic concepts

## Plugin
The plugin is a zip file that contains one or more query stage implementations. It consists of one or more jar files 
(the plugin jar with Stage definition and additional dependencies jar files) and a manifest file that contains metadata
used by Fusion to run the plugin.

In [provided examples](../examples/README.md) the plugin zip file is generated by the `assemblePlugin` gradle task. 
Alternatively, it can be assembled by any other build tool as long as the file and directory structure is correct.

Example of custom META-INF/MANIFEST.MF file:
```
Manifest-Version: 1.0
Plugin-Id: sample-plugin
Plugin-SDK-Version: 1.1.0
Plugin-Base-Package: com.lucidworks.sample
Plugin-Version: 0.0.1

```

## [Query Stage](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/QueryStage.java)
Query Stage class contains implementation of custom processing logic that is applied to each document passing through the query stage. 

A plugin stage class must implement [com.lucidworks.querying.api.QueryStage](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/QueryStage.java) 
interface and be annotated with [com.lucidworks.querying.api.Stage](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/Stage.java) 
annotation. For additional convenience stage implementation can extend 
[com.lucidworks.querying.api.QueryStageBase](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/QueryStageBase.java) class, which
already contains initialization logic and some helpful methods.

Example of a custom query stage implementation:
```java
@Stage(type = "simple", configClass = SimpleStageConfig.class)
public class SimpleStage extends QueryStageBase<SimpleStageConfig> {

  private static final Logger logger = LoggerFactory.getLogger(SimpleStage.class);

  @Override
  public QueryRequestAndResponse process(QueryRequestAndResponse query, Context context) {
    query.getRequest().addQueryParam("timeAllowed", config.timeAllowed());
    return query;
  }
}
```

### Lifecycle
First, Fusion will create a `QueryStage` instance and initialize it. Once the stage is created and initialized, Fusion will then begin calling the `process` method for each query passing through the query pipeline. One stage instance can be used by Fusion for processing multiple queries and the `process` method may be called from multiple concurrently running threads. Additionally, Fusion can initialize and maintain multiple stage instances with the same configuration in separate indexing service nodes. Therefore, it is important to make sure that the plugin stage implementation is thread-safe and processing logic is stateless.

The plugin stage may throw an exception while processing a query. This will **not** cause any side effects, the query will simply not be processed anymore. The whole querying pipeline will still be in use and Fusion will continue to call the `process` method for other queries. Any information about thrown exceptions will be visible in the logs.

#### Initialization
After creation, each stage object will be initialized using the `init(T config, Fusion fusion)` method. This allows the stage to create any needed internal structure and validate the stage configuration. 

Note that initialization occurs immediately after the stage configuration is saved in Fusion. After this the stage instance can be maintained and re-used by Fusion for extensive periods of time even if no queries are being processed through
the stage. It is strongly advised to be mindful of this fact when making decisions on resource allocations.

#### Query-Response processing
After the stage has been initialized, Fusion will start sending queries to the stage for processing by invoking 
`process(QueryRequestAndResponse query, Context context)` on every incoming query.

Note that multiple threads can call the `process` method concurrently, therefore its implementation must be thread-safe.

#### Logging
Query Stage SDK is using the slf4j logging API. The following example demonstrates how logging is implemented inside a plugin stage.

```java
public class MyStage extends QueryStageBase<MyStageConfig> {
  
  private static final Logger logger = LoggerFactory.getLogger(MyStage.class);

  @Override
  public QueryRequestAndResponse process(QueryRequestAndResponse query, Context context) {
    // ......
    logger.info("Processing query '{}'", query);
    // ......
  }
}
```

#### Metrics
Fusion is using [Prometheus and Grafana](https://doc.lucidworks.com/fusion-server/latest/concepts/system/prometheus-grafana/index.html) 
for enhanced metrics collection and querying. Query Stage plugins can add their own custom metrics to the list of 
default metrics already generated by the Fusion querying service.

To be able to publish custom metrics the Prometheus client library must be added to the plugin dependencies
```
provided 'io.prometheus:simpleclient_dropwizard:0.7.0'
```
After that, the Prometheus client can be used to record custom metrics. More information on the Prometheus Java client API can be found at https://github.com/prometheus/client_java#instrumenting

The following code demonstrates how to capture external request time metrics using the Prometheus client API.

```java
public class SampleStage {

  private static final Histogram EXTERNAL_REQUEST_TIME = Histogram.build()
      .help("Time to execute external query request.")
      .name("external_query_request_time")
      .labelNames("request_url")
      .register();
  
    @Override
    public QueryRequestAndResponse process(QueryRequestAndResponse query, Context context) {
      // ......
      Histogram.Timer externalQueryTimer = EXTERNAL_REQUEST_TIME
          .labels(requestUrl)
          .startTimer();
      try {
        // perform external request...
      } finally {
        externalQueryTimer.observeDuration();
      }
      // ......
    }
}
```

## [Query Stage Config](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/config/QueryStageConfig.java)
The Query Stage config defines configuration options specific to a particular query stage instance. These options will be available to the end user via the Fusion UI and API. The plugin config class must extend 
[com.lucidworks.querying.config.QueryStageConfig](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/config/QueryStageConfig.java) and annotated with `@RootSchema`. 

By adding `@Property` and type annotations to your stage configuration interface methods, you can define metadata and type constraints for your plugin configuration fields. This is very similar to Fusion's connector configuration schema.

More detailed information on the configuration and schema capabilities can be found 
[here](https://doc.lucidworks.com/fusion-server/5.0/search-development/getting-data-in/connectors/sdk/java-sdk/java-connector-dev.html#configuration).

Here is an example of a simple stage configuration schema definition:

```java
@RootSchema(
    title = "Simple",
    description = "Simple Query Stage"
)
public interface SimpleStageConfig extends QueryStageConfig {
    
    @Property(
            title = "Time allowed",
            description = "The amount of time allowed for a search to complete.",
            required = true
    )
    @NumberSchema()
    long timeAllowed();
}

```

## Exposed Fusion APIs
SDK-based plugins are capable of communicating with other Fusion components via the [Fusion](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/fusion/Fusion.java) object. This object is passed to the stage during the initialization phase. 

### [RestCall]((src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/fusion/RestCall.java))
This API provides access to the [Fusion REST API](https://doc.lucidworks.com/fusion-server/5.0/reference-guides/api/index.html). You can find an example of its usage in 
[ExternalQueryStage](../examples/sample-plugin-stage/src/main/java/com/lucidworks/sample/query/ExternalQueryStage.java)
class.  

### [Blobs]((src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/fusion/Blobs.java))
This is a specialized API for interaction with the Fusion [Blob Store API](https://doc.lucidworks.com/fusion-server/5.0/reference-guides/api/blob-store-api.html)

# Data structures

## [QueryRequestAndResponse](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/QueryRequestAndResponse.java)
This is a representation of a query request and response. In Fusion, both the query request and response are treated and tracked as one entity. This is the class that is passed through to the `process` method and may be manipulated to inspect/update the request and/or response.

## [Request](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/Request.java)
This is a representation of a query request. You can access this via the `QueryRequestAndResponse` class. It contains information about the query parameters, the headers, as well as the HTTP method called.

## [Response](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/Response.java)
This is a representation of a query response. You can access this via the `QueryRequestAndResponse` class. It contains information about the documents, the facets, and any highlighted terms.
 
## [Document](src/main/java/com/lucidworks/querying/api/Document.java)
This is a representation of a document returned in the query response. On a high level this can be thought of as a list of named fields containing one or multiple values.

## Field
Field is a part of document with its own unique name and one or more values. 
